---
layout: post
title:      "**The Path to Code Begins**"
date:       2020-09-07 17:56:56 +0000
permalink:  the_path_to_code_begins
---

I am a prolific gamer. I know this is nothing new in the world of software development, so I am in good company. This is relevant for two reasons. The first is that, when I play any game in a setting with magic, I am inexorably drawn to playing a magic user. Gaming is, at it's core, escapism. I can swing a sword or shoot a bow in real life (literally, I have fenced for over 20 years and my first two jobs were teaching fencing and archery at summer camps), but I cannot shoot lightning from my hands or move things with my mind. The ultimate escape from real life is to use magic. Or so I thought. Clarke's Third Law states that "any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic". As I got older, and thought more about how computers work, I could not escape the conclusion that software is magic. Syntax is an eldritch incantation, which if performed correctly allows the caster to do almost anything they can imagine. I realized that I could be a magic user in real life, all it would take is learding to write code. I've started down this path on my own, and with just a basic understanding of several languaged, I find my mind constantly wandering to "how could I write a program to do this task?" My mind thinks in the way of code already, now I want to hone it and turn that natural inclination into a career.

This leads into my second connection to gaming. I was always interested in improving my experience with video games, so I have a long history of using mods. First, it was just finding mods which made interesting changes, and then learning how to install and use them. As time progressed, I was intrigued by not just WHAT mods could do, but HOW they did them. I started tinkering (on a very small scale) in game files, finding how how they worked and what the limitations were. Over time, I started reading stories from games journalists about the technology of making games. I hadn't realized how fascinated I was by that process until recently when I was inexplicably excited reading about one game's rope simulation, and how impressed I was when they managed to animate clothing being put on and taken off. Gaming was what first introduced to me the idea that software was a real thing, not just magic that happened somewhere else. It showed my that humans can write code, and can use that code to do amazing things that change people's lives.

Finally, I needed a push to put me on the path to software development. I spent my entire career as a student as a diehard humanities person. I studied medieval history and my hobby was reenacting the American Revolution. My path was set to become a teacher, which was what I did after dithering around in grad school for a couple advanced degrees. I taught medieval history, modern European history, and American history to high school students for four years, and I was miserable.  I finally realized that I needed a new career, and with my earlier revelations, I knew exactly what I should be. As an added bonus, I escaped teaching conditions under Covid!

Now, I look forward to a career where I can make people's lives better. I am excited to work with interesting people and create amazing things. It's a new adventure, and as a gamer, I am ready.
